feat(curriculum): add web standards model lectures (#67270)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/blocks/lecture-understanding-the-web-standards-model/69fc757399f4066e674a5161.md

---
id: 69fc757399f4066e674a5161
title: What Does the Lifecycle of Web Standards Features Look Like?
challengeType: 19
dashedName: what-does-the-lifecycle-of-web-standards-features-look-like
---

# --description--

> In the last lesson, we looked at the process for creating web standards, how proposals are written, reviewed, and eventually finalized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last lesson, we looked at the process for creating web standards: how proposals are written, reviewed, and eventually finalized.
```

> The lifecycle of a web standard feature is related, but a bit more personal. It follows a single feature from the moment someone identifies a problem, all the way to it shipping in every major browser and possibly being deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lifecycle of a web standard feature is related, but on a more granular scale. It follows a single feature from the moment someone identifies a problem all the way to it shipping in every major browser (and possibly being deprecated in the end).
```

Think of the process as the rulebook, and the lifecycle as what actually happens when you play the game.

> 1. ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Proposal**
```

    Every feature starts with a problem someone cared enough to write down. A developer, a browser engineer, or a company files a GitHub issue or explainer describing what the web can't currently do and why it should. At this stage, the idea is loose, with more questions than answers. The goal is simply to find out whether anyone else recognizes the same pain.

> 1. ## Incubation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Incubation**
```

    If the proposal resonates, it enters a period of open discussion and early design. Competing approaches get sketched out, use cases are gathered, and the community stress-tests the idea. Many proposals die here, possibly because the problem turns out to be too niche, or no solution can satisfy everyone. The ones that survive emerge with a clearer shape and at least some browser vendor interest behind them.

> 1. ## Specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Specification**
```

    A surviving proposal gets written up as a formal spec. Every edge case, error condition, and interaction with existing features has to be defined clearly. This is the point where a good idea meets hard reality. Vague concepts have to become exact rules that two independent engineers could read and implement identically.

> 1. ## Interoperability testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Interoperability testing**
```

>     Before a feature can be considered stable, it has to behave the same way in every browser. The W3C Web Platform Tests suite is the main tool for verifying this. It is a shared battery of tests that Chrome, Firefox, Safari, and others all run against their implementations. Diverging results mean either the spec is ambiguous, or someone has a bug, and both have to be resolved before the feature moves forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before a feature can be considered stable, it has to behave the same way in every browser. The W3C Web Platform Tests suite is the main tool for verifying this. It is a shared battery of tests that Chrome, Firefox, Safari, and others all run against their implementations. Diverging results mean either the spec is ambiguous, or someone has a bug. Either must be resolved before the feature moves forward.
```

> 1. ## Finalization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Finalization**
```

>     Once multiple independent implementations pass the tests, the feature is finalized. For W3C, it is a recommendation, for TC39, it is stage 4, and it is a stable entry in the WHATWG living standard. The flags come down and the feature ships to users. At this point, it becomes part of the baseline web platform, something every developer can rely on indefinitely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Once all independent implementations pass the tests, the feature is finalized. For W3C, it is a recommendation, for TC39, it is stage 4, and it is a stable entry in the WHATWG living standard. The flags come down and the feature ships to users. At this point, it becomes part of the baseline web platform, something every developer can rely on indefinitely.
```

Previous sections very much imply that all browsers must pass~

>     Once all independent implementations pass the tests, the feature is finalized. For W3C, it is a recommendation, for TC39, it is stage 4, and it is a stable entry in the WHATWG living standard. The flags come down and the feature ships to users. At this point, it becomes part of the baseline web platform, something every developer can rely on indefinitely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Once multiple independent implementations pass the tests, the feature is finalized. For W3C, it is a recommendation, for TC39, it is stage 4, and it is a stable entry in the WHATWG living standard. The flags come down and the feature ships to users. At this point, it becomes part of the baseline web platform, something every developer can rely on indefinitely.
```

> 1. ## Deprecation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Deprecation**
```

>     Not every standard ages well. Some features get superseded by better ones, others turn out to have security or privacy implications that weren't understood at the time. When a feature needs to go, it gets formally deprecated. That is, supported, but marked as something developers should stop using. Eventually, it is removed from the spec. Removal from browsers is slow and cautious, because the web core promise is that old pages keep working. Some deprecated features linger in browsers for decades out of sheer backwards-compatibility obligation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Not every standard ages well. Some features get superseded by better ones, others turn out to have security or privacy implications that weren't apparent at the time. When a feature needs to go, it gets formally deprecated. That is, supported but marked as something developers should stop using. Eventually, it is removed from the spec. Removal from browsers is slow and cautious, because the core promise of the web is that old pages keep working. Some deprecated features linger in browsers for decades solely for the backwards-compatibility obligation.
```

# --questions--

## --text--

> During which stage of a web feature lifecycle does an idea get stress-tested through open discussion, gathering use cases, and sketching competing approaches?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During which stage of a web feature's lifecycle does an idea get stress-tested through open discussion, gathering use cases, and sketching competing approaches?
```

Think of the stage where the idea is shaped and gains support before being formally written.

---

Finalization

### --feedback--

Think of the stage where the idea is shaped and gains support before being formally written.

## --video-solution--

1

## --text--

What is the purpose of the W3C Web Platform Tests suite during the interoperability testing stage?

## --answers--

To rank browser performance.

### --feedback--

Think about what verifies Chrome, Firefox, and Safari all behave the same way.

---

To replace the need for a written specification.

### --feedback--

Think about what verifies Chrome, Firefox, and Safari all behave the same way.

---

To deprecate old features.

### --feedback--

Think about what verifies Chrome, Firefox, and Safari all behave the same way.

---

To ensure every browser implements the feature identically.

## --video-solution--

4

## --text--

Why do some deprecated web features linger in browsers for decades instead of being removed immediately?

## --answers--

Browser vendors are legally required to keep them forever.

### --feedback--

Think about what happens to websites built years ago when a feature is removed.

---

> The web core promise is that old pages keep working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core promise of the web is that old pages keep working.
```

---

> No one knows how to remove them safely.

Reviewer: this one is probably more true than any of us would admit~ 🤣
